doc: create notation threat model (#242)
notaryproject/notaryproject: threatmodels/notation-threatmodel.md

# Notation Threat Model

## Overview

Notation is a comprehensive tool for generating and verifying signatures associated with software artifacts. Its purpose is to validate the integrity and authenticity, accomplishing this through the implementation of fine-grained policies.

The following diagram illustrates the architecture and components.

![Notation system overview](../media/notation-system.svg)

- **User**: The actor could be a signer or a verifier. A signer interacts with Notation CLI to sign artifacts. A verifier interacts with Notation CLI to verify artifacts against signatures.

> - **Artifact Builder**: The actor who is responsible for producing software artifacts using build systems. Notation supports signing and verification of software artifacts including but are not limited to container images, helm charts, SBOM (Software Bill of Materials). These artifacts can be stored either in remote registries or locally on disk using [OCI image layout](https://github.com/opencontainers/image-spec/blob/v1.0.0/image-layout.md).

Reviewer: nit:
```suggestion
- **Artifact Builder**: The actor who is responsible for producing software artifacts using build systems. Notation supports signing and verification of software artifacts including but are not limited to container images, helm charts, Software Bill of Materials (SBOMs). These artifacts can be stored either in remote registries or locally on disk using [OCI image layout](https://github.com/opencontainers/image-spec/blob/v1.0.0/image-layout.md).
```

- **Execution Environment**: The execution environment includes the host and **File System** where notation CLI will be installed and executed. Notation works with a shared responsibility model which means users/organizations are responsible for securing the notation execution environment. Following are the various directories and files used by the Notation:
  - `config.json` file is used to store various configurations such as credential store information, etc.

>   - `trustpolicy.json` file is used to store trust policy-related data.

Reviewer: nit:
```suggestion
  - `trustpolicy.json` file is used to store trust policy related data.
```

>   - `truststore` directory is used to store various trusted certificates used for verifying the signature.

Reviewer: nit:
```suggestion
  - `truststore` directory is used to store various trusted certificates used for signature verification.
```

  - `localkeys` directory is used to store test keys.
  - `plugins` directory is used to store various plugins.
  
  Notation uses credential stores to securely store the registry credentials.
- **Notation Plugin**: An external component/binary that can integrate as one of the steps in Notation’s workflow for signature generation or verification, see [plugin spec](https://github.com/notaryproject/notaryproject/blob/v1.0.0-rc.2/specs/plugin-extensibility.md) for details.

> - **Registry**: A registry stores container images as well as related content formats, such as Helm charts, OCI artifacts built to the OCI image format specification. Registries are outside Notation trust boundary.

Reviewer: An OCI-compliant registry stores OCI artifacts. Again, container images are also artifacts.

> - **KMS**: A Key Management System that manages the the certificate along with private key that used for signing artifacts or a signing service. KMS are outside Notation trust boundary.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **KMS**: A Key Management System or a signing service that manages the the certificate along with private key that used for signing artifacts. KMS are outside Notation trust boundary.
```

> - **KMS**: A Key Management System that supports the generation and management of signing material such as certificates (along with private key) management or a signing service. KMS are outside Notation trust boundary.

Reviewer: The definition of KMS is unclear. Here we focus on the signing service.

If a KMS that can do key management but canot use its key to do signing, that KMS is not useful in our current notation remote signing scenario.

### Threats and Mitigation

|   Title                      | STRIDE threat type     | Threat Status | Priority | Entity          | Description   | Mitigation   |
| ---------------------------- | ---------------------- | ------------- | -------- | --------------- | ------------- | ------------ |
| Compromised signing key         | Information disclosure | Mitigated     | High     | Signer          | Signing keys are compromised, and this may lead to arbitrary artifacts being signed by attackers | Users store the signing keys in hardware security module (HSM) and rotate them periodically. In case a signing key is compromised, users must revoke associated certificates.  |

> | Inaccessible Registry           | Denial of Service      | Mitigated     | High     | Registry        | Registry is not able to service incoming requests or perform up to spec, thus users are unable to publish any artifacts | Notation supports verification of signatures stored locally |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Inaccessible Registry           | Denial of Service      | Mitigated     | High     | Registry        | Registry is not able to service incoming requests or perform up to spec, thus users are unable to publish any artifacts | Notation supports singing of artifacts stored locally on disk |
```

> | Serving tampered artifacts      | Tampering              | Mitigated     | High     | Registry        | Data stored in registries are tampered, this may lead to malicious artifacts being signed | Notation signs artifacts by digest only, or Notation signs artifacts stored in local file system, and stores signatures locally or in the registry |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Serving tampered artifacts      | Tampering              | Mitigated     | High     | Registry        | Data stored in registries are tampered, this may lead to malicious artifacts being signed | Notation encourages user to signs artifacts using digest (and discourages signing using tag by emitting warnings), or Notation recommends signs artifacts stored in local file system, and stores signatures locally or in the registry |
```

| Disclosure of signature info    | Information disclosure | Mitigated     | High     | Registry        | Man-in-the-middle attack | Notation interacts with trusted registries via TLS or signs artifacts stored in local file system, and then stores signatures locally |

> | Tampered files                  | Tampering              | Mitigated     | High     | File System     | Files read by Notation are tampered, this may lead to failure of notation sign operation | Notation must be installed on secure and trusted infrastructure(shared responsibility with users)|

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Tampered files                  | Tampering              | Not Mitigated     | High     | File System     | Files read by Notation are tampered, this may lead to failure of notation sign operation | Notation must be installed on secure and trusted infrastructure(shared responsibility with users)|
```

| Disclosure of files             | Information disclosure | Mitigated     | High     | File System     | Files are accessed by attackers, this may lead to disclosure of notation config files and credential files | Notation must be installed on secure and trusted infrastructure(shared responsibility mode). Notation stores the credentials securely using credential store. Notation interacts with notation plugin to access signing keys via remote KMS or a HSM device |
| Malicious plugin                | Tampering              | Mitigated     | High     | Notation Plugin | A malicious plugin is installed, this may lead to arbitrary code being executed by attackers | Verify the integrity and authenticity of the plugin before using the plugin |

> | Using weak crypto algorithms during the signing | Repudiation         | Mitigated     | High     | Bypass of signature verification | Notation restricts the signing algorithm to the following [set](https://github.com/notaryproject/notaryproject/blob/main/specs/signature-specification.md#algorithm-selection) |

Reviewer: Missing entity

> | Compromised Notation dependencies | Tampering              | Not mitigated  | High     | Notation       | The dependencies that built into Notation binary was compromised, this may lead to arbitrary code being executed | Notation keeps dependencies up-to-date. Always use static build instead of dynamic linking |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Compromised Notation dependencies | Tampering              | Mitigated  | High     | Notation       | The dependencies that built into Notation binary was compromised, this may lead to arbitrary code being executed | Notation keeps dependencies up-to-date and adds new dependency after careful consideration and only if it's absolutely required. Always use static build instead of dynamic linking |
```

> | Compromised Notation dependencies | Tampering              | Not mitigated  | High     | Notation       | The dependencies that built into Notation binary was compromised, this may lead to arbitrary code being executed | Notation keeps dependencies up-to-date |

Reviewer: Should we consider always static build instead of dynamic linking?

| Inaccessible Registry                                          | Denial of Service      | Mitigated     | High     | Registry        | Registry is not able to service incoming requests or perform up to spec, thus users are unable to verify artifacts | Notation supports verification of signatures stored locally |
| Serving tampered artifacts                                     | Tampering              | Mitigated     | High     | Registry        | Data stored in registries are tampered, this may lead to malicious artifacts being consumed | Notation verifies the digest specified by the user and the digest store in the signature are the same. Notation does support verification using tag but its highly discouraged by emitting a warning |
| Disclosure of signature info                                   | Information disclosure | Mitigated     | High     | Registry        | Man-in-the-middle attack | Notation interacts with trusted registries via TLS by default or Notation signs artifacts stored in local file system, and then stores signatures locally |

> | Tampered files                                                 | Tampering              | Mitigated     | High     | File System      | Files read by Notation are tampered, this may lead to failure of notation verify operation or verification bypassed | Notation must be installed on secure and trusted infrastructure(shared responsibility mode) |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Tampered files                                                 | Tampering              | Not Mitigated     | High     | File System      | Files read by Notation are tampered, this may lead to failure of notation verify operation or verification bypassed | Notation must be installed on secure and trusted infrastructure(shared responsibility mode) |
```

| Inaccessible OCSP Responder                                    | Denial of Service      | Not Mitigated | High     | OCSP Responder  | OCSP Responder is not able to service incoming requests or perform up to spec, thus users are unable to validate certificate revocation status | It cannot be mitigated, since revocation status should be retrieved from OCSP responder, which requires network access. Notation verification should fail if revocation check is configured as `enforced` and OCSP responder is inaccessible. Users can configure trust policy to log or skip revocation check if OCSP responder is not reliable. |

> | Compromised Notation dependencies                              | Tampering              | Not mitigated | High     | Notation       | The dependencies that built into Notation binary was compromised, this may lead to arbitrary code being executed | Notation keeps dependencies up-to-date |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Compromised Notation dependencies                              | Tampering              | Mitigated | High     | Notation       | The dependencies that built into Notation binary was compromised, this may lead to arbitrary code being executed | Notation keeps dependencies up-to-date and adds new dependency after careful consideration and only if it's absolutely required. Always use static build instead of dynamic linking |
```

  - `config.json` file is used to store various configurations such as credential store information, etc.
  - `trustpolicy.json` file is used to store trust policy related data.
  - `truststore` directory is used to store various trusted certificates used for signature verification.
  - `localkeys` directory is used to store test keys.
  - `plugins` directory is used to store various plugins.
  
  Notation uses credential stores to securely store the registry credentials.
- **Notation Plugin**: An external component/binary that can integrate as one of the steps in Notation’s workflow for signature generation or verification, see [plugin spec](https://github.com/notaryproject/notaryproject/blob/v1.0.0-rc.2/specs/plugin-extensibility.md) for details.
- **Registry**: An OCI-compliant registry that stores OCI artifacts, like container images, Helm charts or other OCI artifacts. Registries are outside Notation trust boundary.

> - **KMS**: A Key Management System that manages the the certificate along with private key that used for signing artifacts or a signing service. KMS are outside Notation trust boundary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **KMS**: A Key Management System that manages the the certificate along with private key that used for signing artifacts and provides a signing service. KMS are outside Notation trust boundary.
```

Author: @shizhMSFT I prefer to update it based on Pritesh's comment https://github.com/notaryproject/notaryproject/pull/242#discussion_r1242933122
